
INSTALLATION
------------

There are two basic ways to install FATware:

1) Load "FATware-?-?.tap" to your Spectrum and follow instructions on screen.

   Either use PC with emulator to generate audio signal for your Spectrum's
   tape input or use previous version of FATware (if present) to load setup
   program directly from disk.

2) If you own EEPROM programmer, flash your EEPROM with "FATware-?-?.raw".

   NOTE: Optimisations of divIDE board footprint led to some address line
   swaps. Therefore, actual EEPROM content must be "swizzled" in order to
   appear linear in Z80 address space. It is important to understand the
   difference between "FATware-?-?.bin" and "FATware-?-?.raw". BIN is the
   ordinary linear memory image while RAW is the swizzled version to be
   used for flashing.


CONTROLS
--------

NMI - enter disk browser

UP/DOWN - move cursor
ENTER - select item
BREAK - cancel/exit window
R + NMI - reset

Browser-specific controls:

EDIT - change volume
SS + ENTER - select TAP and reset (in browser)
SS + R - reset (in browser)


VERSION HISTORY
---------------

FATware 0.12
------------

- bugfix release

FATware 0.11
------------

- added Z80 snapshot support
- added new controls:

SS + R - soft reset
SS + ENTER - select TAP and RESET (if pressed in browser)

- couple of minor fixes and improvements

FATware 0.10
------------

FATware is a firmware for divIDE (http://baze.au.com/divide) that natively
supports widely used FAT-16 filesystem. In its current state it is read-only
but adding write support is one of my top priroties in further development.

Key features:

- supports long file names
- supports up to 8 FAT partitions
- supports WinNT 4GB FAT partitions (might need some testing)
- emulates standard tape routines so its possible to instantly load .TAP files
- loads 48k/128k .SNA snapshots (.Z80 support is planned)
- includes .SCR and dithvIDE/GigaScreen viewer (on machines with two videorams)


CONTACT
-------

Please contact me at baze@stonline.sk with any bug reports. If possible, send
a short description of how to reproduce bug and attach files that cause errors.
I might be already aware of some bugs but your help is appreciated.

I will also accept feature suggestions but please be patient as there are more
important core features waiting to be implemented. Enjoy.

Milos Bazelides (baze/3SC)
