=================================
ANDROIDS ROM Cartridge for TS2068
Timex Sinclair
=================================

ANDROIDS
© Peter Aked 1983

Loading time: 2 minutes, 30 seconds

Load name must be typed in lower case letters.

Androids is a challenging strategy game of hunter and hunted, pitting the
android against the monster masters of a maze that, seemingly, has no exit. As
the android's force field weakens and his laser loses energy, he's prey to the
lurking aliens who are waiting to spring when he's defenseless. Whether he
makes it to the exit of the labyrinth, whether he has the strength to defend
himself when he's backed into a corner, whether he destroys the monsters
before they destroy him, all depend on how well you plan his desperate moves
and whether your strategy succeeds.

TIMEX COMMAND CARTRIDGE INSTRUCTIONS
If you have the cartridge version of this software program, please follow the
steps listed below:

1. Turn off your TS2000.
2. Lift cartridge door open.
3. Insert command cartridge with label side up.
4. Close cartridge door.
5. Turn on your TS2000.
6. Program will now begin execution.

If Step 6 does not occur, start over with Step 1 ... and reseat cartridge
once again.

ALWAYS TURN OFF YOUR TS2gg@@ BEFORE INSERTING OR REMOVING CARTRIDGE.

You may bypass tape load instructions below.

TO LOAD: Press LOAD "androids", start the cassette player and press enter.
The tape loads in 2 minutes 30 seconds. Stop the tape when an option menu
appears on the screen. Choose quickly. If you don't make up your mind before
the word "Androids" reaches the bottom of the screen, the demonstration
program begins.

TO PLAY: Your android is trapped in a maze while monsters haunt the labyrinth.
our objective is to get him out of the maze in operating condition. Your android
is equipped with a force field energy maximum of five and a laser maximum of
strength seven. These provide the power to sustain and protect him.
TO MOVE THE ANDROID: The "A" key moves your android up in the maze and
"Z" moves him down. Press "X" to move him to the left, "C" to move him to your
right. "V" fires his laser in the direction he's going.

(NOTE: If these movement keys are inconvenient for you, or if you just want
to change the movement keys, you can set your own by choosing "C"
("Change Keys") when the options menu is on your display screen. The
computer will then ask you which keys you want to use to move the android
up, down, right and left and to fire his laser. The keys you choose will work
until you quit the program or until you set new ones.)

JOYSTICK FEATURE - 1 PLAYER
This program optionally allows the use of a joystick to control its actions. With
the joystick in slot 1 the following actions replace their keyboard counterparts:

                Stick up = up
                Stick down = down
                Stick left = left
                Stick right = right
                Button = fire laser

THIS PROGRAM REQUIRES THE JOYSTICK TO BE IN THE PLAYER 1 SLOT.

Until you see the pulsating blue box that marks the exit from the maze, move
your android through the corridors. You may want to take a detour to renew his
force field strength or recharge his laser if he's been seriously weakened in his
encounters with the monsters of the maze.

TO SCORE: When the maze appears on your display screen, you can take as
much time as you like to study the situation and decide which way your android
should move to avoid monsters and find the exit. But notice you start with 3,082
bonus points that tick off to zero very quickly in the upper left hand corner of the
screen. If you don't get your android off to a quick escape, you'll lose them all
before you move him.

Although the most points come from moving your android out of the maze
quickly with all of his field force and his laser energy intact, you pick up 18
points every time he knocks out a monster with his laser.

Remember, each time your android fires his laser it loses one point of energy.
Once he's fired seven times, he's got to recharge his weapon or he's powerless
against the monsters.

Every time a monster fires on your android or collides with him, you lose one
point of field energy. When he's been hit five times, his power is gone - and
one more hit finishes him and ends the game.

Watch the field strength and the laser energy level meters on the upper right.
Your strategy in deciding which way to take your android through the maze is Â©
going to depend on whether he's got the strength and energy to make it.

STRATEGY
If his laser energy and force field strength are at zero, your android can hide as
long as a light blue box is between him and the monsters. The light blue boxes
represent force fields monsters can't cross. But your android can't fire his laser
through them either, so you can't knock out a monster without bringing your
android out in the open.

Dark blue boxes with a "G" inside are laser recharging stations. Every time your
android enters a "G" box, you increase his laser energy by two points, up to the
maximum of seven. Red boxes with an "S" strengthen your android's force field
by one point each time he steps into one (maximum is five).

Your android doesn't start his travels in the same position, and the exit is
changed every time you play. Therefore, begin each game by moving your
android at random, trying to locate the exit.

Moving your android too fast through the maze may deplete his force field
strength when he's surprised by monsters ahead of him. Moving him too slowly
will lose bonus points for finding the exit. The android is home safe, but your
score is low.

Once you've successfully maneuvered your android out of the maze, press "P" to
continue playing. "Androids" begins again and continues until your android is
destroyed in the maze. The game is over.

Should you not want to continue after releasing your android from the labyrinth,
turn off the computer.

LOADING INSTRUCTIONS:
(See Chapter 4 of your instruction manual for detailed instructions.)

1. First listen to the tape so you will be familiar with its distinct sections. The
tape has a period of silence at the beginning, followed by a high-pitched,
screechy noise. This is the computer program. The program is recorded twice on
the cassette in case one does not load.

2. Set the volume control on the cassette deck to about 3/4 of the maximum.
If you have tone controls, set the bass to minimum and treble to maximum. If you
have just one tone control, set it to HIGH or MAXIMUM.

3. Rewind the tape to the beginning. Connect the EAR jack on the computer
to the EAR jack on the cassette deck recorder. Make sure the plugs are clean
and securely in place.

4. To instruct the computer to accept the program you must press the LOAD
command and type the name of the program in quotation marks. See the
instructions or cassette for the correct loading name.

5. Start the cassette deck, allow a few seconds for it to get up to speed, then
press ENTER during the silence before the program begins.

6. The border of the TV screen will alternate between pale blue (cyan) and red,
during the time the computer is searching for the program on the tape.

7. When the program has been found, the screen border will show a pattern of
lines in the same shades of blue and red, and shortly the name of the program
will appear on the screen.

8. Next, as the program itself is being loaded into the computer, the border
pattern will become thinner, faster moving yellow and dark blue lines.

9. When the computer has finished loading the program, one of two things
will happen:

  1. Most commercial programs will begin running automatically, usually with a
  "title screen" or instructions to the user. (A title screen may tell you that the
  tape is still loading, if not, you should stop the tape immediately at this point
  so as to be in the proper position to load the next program if you wish.) or

  2. The screen will be blank, except for a 0 OK, 0:1 in the lower left hand
  corner. This is a report code and means that the computer has successfully
  loaded the program.
  Stop the tape immediately. To execute the program, you press RUN and
  ENTER. This will start the program.

SOME SUGGESTIONS
1. The volume at which the program is loaded is very important. Usually 3/4
maximum volume works best, but recorders vary and may require
experimentation with the volume setting. If you have a technical background you
can check the output level of your recorder's EAR/SPKR jack. It must be at least
4-volts peak-to-peak, although 5 to 6-volts peak-to-peak is best.

2. Clean and demagnetize the heads of the tape recorder. Your ears may not
pick up the signal fluctuations due to magnetic flux on the tape heads, but the
computer has a much more sensitive "ear."

3. The computer is very susceptible to outside interference. Working on a
metal table or near electrical appliances should be avoided.

4. Occasionally, once a program has loaded, the video display will show
instability. This can be corrected by adjusting the vertical hold on the television.

WARRANTY
There are no warranties which extend beyond the description on the face
hereof. No other warranty, whether express or implied, including the warranty of
merchantability, shall exist in connection with the sale of this product. In no
event shall Timex be liable for any consequential, incidental or special damages.

MODEL NO. 345-064001

© 1983 Timex Computer Corporation Waterbury, Connecticut 06725