=================================
CASINO 1 ROM Cartridge for TS2068
Timex Sinclair
=================================

CASINO 1
© R Leninger 1983

Loading time: 1 minute 45 seconds

Load name must be typed in lower case letters.

CASINO 1 includes computer simulations of three popular games of chance:
Twenty-One (or "Blackjack"), Craps and Slot Machines. Twenty-One and Craps
may be enjoyed by up to three players per game. Although Slots is designed for
one player at a time, any number can participate if they're willing to share the
initial stake of $100.

Each game on the Casino program cassette features realistic graphics and
stimulating sound effects to create the excitement of Las Vegas or Monte Carlo
in your own home. Since each game on the Casino program is governed by the
same odds and the same random selection that characterize the "real thing", the
dedicated student of gambling will find that Casino's games provide an excellent
opportunity for sharpening mathematical skills that often mean the difference
between breaking even and winning big.

COMMAND CARTRIDGE INSTRUCTIONS
If you have the cartridge version of this software program please follow the
steps listed below:

1. Turn off your TS2000
2. Lift cartridge door open
3. Insert command cartridge
4. Program will now begin execution. If Step 5 does not occur - start over with
   Step 1 ... and reseat cartridge once again.

ALWAYS TURN OFF YOUR TS2000 BEFORE INSERTING OR REMOVING CARTRIDGE

You may bypass tape load instructions below.

TO LOAD: Press LOAD "casino", start the cassette recorder and press ENTER.
Turn off the tape recorder when you see a "menu" on the screen that says:

        The following are available

        1. Twenty-One
        2. Craps
        3. Slots
        4. Exit this program
        Select game by number

TO PLAY: Decide which of the three games you want to play and press the
number for that game listed on the menu. If you choose Twenty-One or Craps,
the computer will ask you how many people are playing. After you enter a
number (or immediately, if you've chosen Slots), the computer sets the game.

In each game, you must bet before the action begins. The computer stakes you
to $100 (in Slots, it even stacks up a hundred silver dollars for you). You may bet
up to $999 in Twenty-One (but you can't bet more than you have, your beginning
limit is $100), but you can only feed one dollar at a time, up to 3 bets into the
Slots. Craps allows you to bet up to $95 per category (there are ten bet
categories) in increments of $5. But again, you cannot bet more than you have.

To place your first bet in Twenty-One, enter the amount of money you want to
risk. When all of the players have made an initial bet, the computer deals the
first two cars to each hand. Dealer's hand is shown with one card face down,
one face up; other hands are shown face up.

In Craps, select a betting category by moving the V-shaped cursor up or down
until it's at the category you want to bet in and them press the number "1" for
each $5 you want to bet in that category. You may continue placing bets until
you reach your limit and/or press ENTER (if you change your mind, you may
remove your money or decrease it in $5 increments by pressing the "0" key.
Once all players have entered an initial bet, the computer rolls the dice.

In Slots, you see a slot machine in the upper left quadrant of your display
screen. You may bet up to three lines at a time by pressing the "B" key for each
coin you want to drop. If you place only one bet the center slot machine spins
when you press the "P" key to pull. If you place two bets, the top two machines
are set in motion by a pull.

STRATEGIES: If you're not an experienced gambler, you'll probably want to play
Twenty-One or Craps the first few times with someone who knows the games.
(Don't worry; he can't take advantage of your lack of experience - it's the
computer that deals the cards or rolls the dice.)  They're both complicated games
that can be confused (or expensive if the computer didn't advance you your
stake). If you don't have any gambling friends, it is helpful to read the rules of
Twenty-One or Craps in a reference book such as "Hoyle's Rules of Games."
Although you can teach yourself both games by experience, the fast action of
the Casino program sometimes leaves you bewildered.

The object of TWENTY-ONE is to build a hand of cards whose values add up to
21 - or closer to 21 (without going over that number) than anyone else's hand.
If you go over 21, you "bust" and lose your money. An Ace counts as either one
or 11 (the computer won't bust you by counting it as an 11 when you'd still be
okay if it were a 1):  face cards (King, Queen and Jack) count as 10, and number
cards 2 to 10 have the value of their numbers.

The computer will deal you two cards and ask if you want to be hit (this means,
do you want to have another card?). Before you press "y" (yes) or "n" (no), count
your hand and look at the card that shows in the dealer's hand. If your cards are,
for example, a ten and a nine - for 19 - you will probably want to "stand".
Press "n". Once you stand, you're finished playing this hand - which continues
until all players have stood. At the end of the hand, the dealer shows his cards
and bets are paid or lost. The game continues until all players have lost all their
money or until all players refuse to enter an amount when asked to bet.

(If you do not have enough money to double your bet you will not be given these
options).

If your cards total 11 you will be asked if you wish to double. Pressing "y" for
yes, your bet will be doubled and you will be dealt only 1 more card. Pressing
"n" will allow you to continue play without doubling.

If you are dealt Q or the same cards (say 2 Queens) you will be asked if you
wish to split your hand. Press "y" if you wish to have your bet doubled and your
cards split into 2 separate hands. Press "n" to continue play without splitting
your hand.

In "Craps", on the opening bet, only a "7", "11" or "craps" (2,3 or 12) make any
difference if you bet on "LINE" or "DON'T PASS". If you bet on the LINE
category and a "7" or an "11" is rolled, then you win. If you bet on the
"DON'T PASS" or "CRAPS" categories and "craps" is rolled, you win. If you
wagered on "CRAPS" and any number except "2", "3", or "12" is rolled ( or if you
bet "LINE" and "CRAPS" is rolled) then you lose. If any number except 2,3,7,
11 or 12 is rolled and you have placed your bet on "LINE" or on "DON'T PASS",
you neither win nor lose.

Any other number rolled becomes the "Point" and is displayed in the upper right
hand corner of your display screen. The object of the game now is for the
"Shooter" (the person rolling the dice; in this case, the computer) to roll the
point again before he rolls a 7. If he rolls a point first, he wins; if he rolls a 7 first,
he loses. You are betting, before each roll, on whether he will win, lose or have
to roll again.

Your choices are:

LINE - this is a bet that will roll the point before getting a 7. If he does, you win;
if he doesn't, you lose.

DON'T PASS - is the opposite of LINE; it's a bet that he will not roll the point
before a 7 is rolled.

7 ON THE NEXT ROLL and 11 ON THE NEXT ROLL are self explanatory. If you
bet that 7 or 11 will be thrown next and you're right, you win; if any other
number (including the Point) is thrown, you lose.

DOUBLES ON THE NEXT ROLL and CRAPS ON THE NEXT ROLL are like 7 or
11 ON THE NEXT ROLL. "Doubles" are 2,4,6,8,10 or 12 rolled as two ones,
two twos, two threes and so on. Craps are (2,3 or 12).

FIELD - is a bet that any of the numbers which the computer shows in
parenthesis after FIELD will be thrown on the next roll.

6 BEFORE 7 - is a bet that a 6 will be rolled before a 7 is thrown, but not
necessarily on the next roll.

4 the hard way - you win if 2 two's are rolled before any other kind of 4 is
rolled, 8 the hard way - you win if 2 four's are rolled before any other kind of 8
is rolled.

After each roll, the computer will show you which bets won, which lost and which
stand (because they neither won nor lost), pays winnings and subtracts losses,
and asks you to enter another bet on the next roll. If you bet 0, the game ends.

Fortunately or unfortunately, there is no strategy for SLOTS. You simply feed
your coins into the machines and pull the handle until all of your money is gone
or you've gotten tired of the game. You may end the game any time you like by
pressing "P" without entering a "B" first.

To stop the bet in between bets on blackjack and craps, press the "S" key when
asked to place a bet.

LOADING INSTRUCTIONS:
(See Chapter 4 of your instruction manual for detailed instructions.)

1. First listen to the tape so you will be familiar with its distinct sections. The
tape has a period of silence at the beginning, followed by a high-pitched,
screechy noise. This is the computer program. The program is recorded twice on
the cassette in case one does not load.

2. Set the volume control on the cassette deck to about 3/4 of the maximum.
If you have tone controls, set the bass to minimum and treble to maximum. If you
have just one tone controls, set it to HIGH or MAXIMUM.

3. Rewind the tape to the beginning. Connect the EAR jack on the computer
to the EAR jack on the cassette deck recorder. Make sure the plugs are clean
and securely in place.

4. To instruct the computer to accept the program you must press the LOAD
command and type the name of the program in quotation marks. See the
instructions or cassette for the correct loading name.

5. Start the cassette deck, allow a few seconds for it to get up to speed, then
press ENTER during the silence before the program begins.

6. The border of the TV screen will alternate between pale blue (cyan) and red,
during the time the computer is searching for the program on the tape.

7. When the program has been found, the screen border will show a pattern of
lines in the same shades of blue and red, and shortly the name of the program
will appear on the screen.

8. Next, as the program itself is being loaded into the computer, the border
pattern will become thinner, faster moving yellow and dark blue lines.

9. When the computer has finished loading the program, one of two things
will happen:

  1. Most commercial programs will begin running automatically, usually with a
  "title screen" or instructions to the user. (A title screen may tell you that the
  tape is still loading, if not, you should stop the tape immediately at this point
  so as to be in the proper position to load the next program if you wish.) or

  2. The screen will be blank, except for a 0 OK, 0:1 in the lower left hand
  corner. This is a report code and means that the computer has successfully
  loaded the program.
  Stop the tape immediately. To execute the program, you press RUN and
  ENTER. This will start the program.

SOME SUGGESTIONS
1. The volume at which the program is loaded is very important. Usually 3/4
maximum volume works best, but recorders vary and may require
experimentation with the volume setting. If you have a technical background you
can check the output level of your recorder's EAR/SPKR jack. It must be at least
4 volts peak-to-peak, although 5 to 6 volts peak-to-peak is best.

2. Clean and demagnetize the heads of the tape recorder. Your ears may not
pick up the signal fluctuations due to magnetic flux on the tape heads, but the
computer has a much more sensitive "ear".

3. The computer is very susceptible to outside interference. Working on a
metal table or near electrical appliances should be avoided.

4. Occasionally, once a program has loaded, the video display will show
instability. This can be corrected by adjusting the vertical hold on the television.

WARRANTY
There are no warranties which extend beyond the description on the face
hereof. No other warranty, whether express or implied, including the warranty of
merchantability, shall exist in connection with the sale of this product. In no
event shall Timex be liable for any consequential, incidental or special damages.

MODEL NO 345-064004

© 1983 Timex Computer Corporation Waterbury, Connecticut 06725