=========================================
FLIGHT SIMULATOR ROM Cartridge for TS1500
Timex Sinclair
=========================================

FLIGHT SIMULATOR
© PSION 1982

Over the last decade, with the increasing power of computers, pilots have been
trained to "fly" new-airliners on large scale, computer-controlled simulators on
the ground. Even on a small microcomputer like the T/S 1500 the essential
parameters of flight, the dynamics of the airplane, the navigation of the airplane,
the main instruments and the representation of the outside world can be
portrayed in real time. "FLIGHT Simulator" includes these effects and represents
a small, high-performance, two-engined, propeller-driven airplane.

ASPECTS OF FLYING
The essential controls of an airplane include the joystick, flaps and engine
power. Moving the joystick sideways affects the ailerons on the wings causing
the plane to bank to the left or right. Moving the joystick forwards and
backwards affects the elevators on the tailplane so that the nose of the airplane
moves down or up respectively.

The altitude and motion of an airplane is shown by many instruments and
navigational aids in the pilot's cockpit, as discussed in the next section. The pilot
needs to use these instruments to navigate his airplane on to the right line or
vector for approach to a runway, to fly his airplane on the right heading or
bearing along that vector and to approach the runway with the right speed,
altitude and descent angle to land the airplane. Typically, the correct approach
angle of descent should be about 3 degrees which implies an altitude of about 6,00
feet at 20 miles out, 3,000 feet at 10 miles out, and 1,000 feet at about 3.5 miles
from the runway.

FLYING ON THE T/S 1500
To play, insert the software cartridge into the Timex Command Cartridge Player
{see instruction booklet for details) and begin. The program will immediately start
executing and will first ask you several questions. It will ask "FINAL APPROACH
(Y/N)?" If you reply YES (or Y) the program will only execute the last stages of
approach and visual landing for you to practice the final touchdown. Normally
you will reply NO (or N) to this question to obtain the full feature program. The
computer will then ask whether you want to include the effects of wind. Reply
YES (or Y) only if you are a competent pilot and can deal with the additional
complexity.

There are three different displays shown in the program. The cockpit display
shows the essential cockpit instruments in the lower half of the screen and the
outside world through the windows in the upper half of the screen. You can
switch, however, to a navigational chart or map which shows the position of the
runway, the position of various beacons which you might use and the position of
the airplane relative to the ground. In the final visual approach the pilot's cockpit
display will change to show the runway lights approaching you, together with
some essential instruments for final touchdown.

THE COCKPIT DISPLAY
After replying to the initial questions, the pilot's view and cockpit display will
automatically be shown on the screen with the following perspective and
instruments. The top half of the screen shows a view of the cockpit
windows where you will see the horizon formed by the light sky and dark ground.
As the altitude of the plane changes, so the visual horizon will move to display
the effects of banking, diving and climbing.

Below the cockpit windows is the cockpit panel with a variety of gauges and
instruments.

Power     - engine thrust or power, controlled by the throttle.

Flap      - a gauge showing the degree of flap extended on the wings.

Fuel      - gauge the shaded area shows the amount of fuel left.

ROC       - the rate of climb indicator shows the vertical speed of climb
            (positive) or descent (negative) of the airplane graduated in units
            of 600 feet per minute. In level flight the ROC indicator would be
            precisely half way up the gauge.

Altimeter - numerical reading shows the height of the airplane above sea-level
            in feet.

Speed     - numerical reading shows the speed of the airplane through the air
            in knots.

RDF clock - is shown in the left center of the instrument panel. This represents
            the radio-direction-finding navigational equipment as a "clock" with
            a small airplane drawn in the middle which points in the direction or
            heading of the airplane. At any time you, the pilot, are logged on to
            a particular radio beacon. The position of this beacon, relative to
            the direction of flight of the airplane, is shown as a flashing dot on
            the circumference of the REF clock.

Heading   - this is shown as a numerical reading immediately above the RDF clock.
            The heading shows the direction of flight of the airplane in compass
            degrees.

Additional navigational information about the current beacon is displayed in the
box next to the RDF clock.

BCN refers to beacon and adjacent to this is displayed the call sign of the
particular beacon on which you are currently logged. Below this are two
additional indicators.

BRG is the bearing of the beacon relative to the airplane in compass degrees.
DST is the distance in nautical miles of the current beacon relative to the
airplane.

THE MAP
If you press the key M on the T/S 1500 the display will change to a map or chart
of the runway and its environs for an area of some 32 miles by 20 miles. The
map shows the four compass points of NORTH (N 0 degrees) EAST (E 90 degrees), SOUTH
(S 189 degrees) and WEST (W 270 degrees). The runway lies in the middle of the map
and runs along east to west (90 degrees, 270 degrees). Therefore, on your final
approach for landing the plane must be travelling on a heading of exactly 90 degrees
or 270 degrees.

The map also shows the position of the various beacons in the area of the
runway and their names. There are four outer beacons (ONE, OSE, OSW, ONW)
and two inner beacons (IE and IW). The two inner beacons are about three miles
from each end of the runway to help the navigation in the final approach. The
logged on beacon is shown as a flashing dot, in addition, you will use the
position of the airplane on the map shown as a flashing dot. This airport is a
coastal airport and you will see mountains to the east some 7.5 miles from the
runway. The mountain range reaches an altitude of 1500 feet. If you approach
the runway from the east you cannot allow your altitude to fall below 1500 feet
without crashing before you pass the mountains. To return to the cockpit
display, press the key "M" again.

THE VISUAL APPROACH
If you are successful in navigating the airplane onto the right vector or bearing
from the runway, onto the right course, position and altitude, press the key "V"
about three miles out to show a full, moving, perspective view of the runway
lights and features. The horizon can still be seen in the far distance at the top of
the screen. You will need to bank, adjust nose altitude, flaps and power to be
able to land on the runway.

Be sure that your undercarriage is down. The essential instruments of a typical
ILS instrument landing system are shown in the bottom of the screen. These
include the speed of the airplane and the height of the airplane's wheels above
the ground as measured by the radio altimeter (a radio altimeter uses the
reflection of a radio beam from the ground to measure precisely the height of
the airplane from the ground). On the left hand side at the bottom of the display
is the most important instrument of your ILS system. This is a square gauge
which shows the position of the start of the runway relative to the position of the
airplane. To the pilot it behaves rather like an artificial horizon but in two
dimensions. The position of the start of the runway is shown as a flashing dot
and when the plane is on precisely the right course or vector in direction and
height, the flashing dot will be at the center of the display. If the flashing dot is
above the center, the plane is descending too steeply, while if the flashing dot is
below the center the plane is not descending steeply enough. If the flashing dot
moves to the left, it implies the runway is to the left and you must bank toward
the left and act similarly if the flashing dot moves to the right.

PILOT CONTROLS
Joystick - The joystick of the airplane is represented on the keyboard of the
T/S 1500 by the cursor arrows (keys 5, 6, 7 and 8). Press <- (key 5) to bank left.
Press -> (key 8) to bank right. Press ^ (key 6) to move the joystick forward and
point the nose of the plane down for diving. Press v (key 7) to pull the joystick
toward you so that the nose of the plane goes up for ascent.

Power - The engine's thrust or power is controlled by the keys "P" and "O". By
pressing the key "P" the throttle is increased and the engine gives more power,
while pressing key "O" reduces the throttle and engine power (note "O" is to the
left of "P").

Flaps - The extent of the flaps on the wings is controlled by the keys "F" and
"D". Press the key "F" to extend the flaps further and press the key "D" to
retract, or partially retract the flaps (note key "D" is to the left of key "F"). The
flaps can be extended or retracted to a varying degree (as shown on the gauge
and should only be fully extended for the final stage of landing to avoid stalling
at reduced speed. Extending the flaps while the plane is at high speed could
possibly damage or tear off the wings of the plane.

Gear - The gear or undercarriage can be extended by pressing the key "G". If
the gear is down pressing the key "G" will retract the undercarriage. The
undercarriage should not be dropped at high speed as apart from increasing the
drag on the plane, you may damage or destroy the undercarriage.

Beacon - To change the current logged-on beacon, press the key "B". As long
as you press the key "B" the current beacon will change sequentially until you
obtain the navigational beacon you require.

Map - Press the key "M" to switch the display from the cockpit pilot's display to
the map or to switch back from the map to the cockpit pilot's display.

Visual - Press the key "V" to switch the display to a visual perspective of the
runway. You will see nothing if you are too far from the runway.

You may press several keys simultaneously.

Never press the BREAK key.

NAVIGATION
The most difficult part of flying is the approach and landing at an airfield. You
can experiment with the controls in varying the speed, altitude and direction of
the plane at a reasonably high altitude without worrying about the navigation. If
you wish to land the plane however, you will have to navigate the plane on to
the right vector and on to the right course, and you will have to approach the
runway at roughly the right glide angle. This is a difficult task and requires a lot
of practice and experience before you can achieve a landing successfully.

The map and instruments will help you to determine your position precisely. You
will then need to think of the approximate maneuvers and course to approach
the airfield on the right flight path. The runway lies east to west in the simulation
on a line (or vector) from 90 degrees to 270 degrees or vice versa. You may approach
the runway from either end. For example, if you wish to approach the runway from
the east to the west, you must first maneuver the airplane far to the east of the
runway. If you use the beacon IE you will need to fly the plane until the beacon
is on a bearing (or vector) of 270 degrees. If you then bank on to this bearing on a
course or heading of 270 degrees, you will be flying on exactly the right flight path
for your approach to the runway. As you fly toward the beacon IE, to keep on the
right flight path you must ensure that both the heading and the beacon coincide
at 270 degrees. As you fly over the beacon in the later stages of the approach, the
bearing of the beacon will of course change to 90 degrees. Similarly, you may use any
of the other beacons to set a course for a particular flight objective. When heading
directly for a beacon, remember that your heading and the beacon bearing must
always coincide precisely. Flying is difficult for the uninitiated and if you have
trouble navigating yourself to the runway for the final visual landing you can
always use the option at the beginning of the program to give you an automatic
approach and allow you to experiment with the visual landing.

Key   Pilot Control
^     Joystick forward (dive)
v     Joystick backward (climb)
->    Joystick to right (bank to right)
<-    Joystick to left (bank to left}
P     Increase throttle (more power)
O     Decrease throttle (less power)
F     Increase flap extent
D     Decrease flap extent
G     Lower gear (undercarriage if up. Raise gear undercarriage if down)
B     Change beacon sequentially
M     Switch from cockpit display to navigational Map or back to cockpit
V     Switch to Visual of runway if you are near the runway or back to cockpit
      display

WARRANTY
There are no warranties which extend beyond the description on the face
hereof. No other warranty, whether express or implied, including the warranty of
merchantability, shall exist in connection with the sale of this product. In no
event shall Timex be liable for any consequential, incidental or special damages.

MODEL NO. 344-0953903
